Revise, expand and update the documentation on solvers/ (#2777)
diffblue/cbmc: src/solvers/README.md

\section solvers-overview Overview

This directory contains most of the decision procedure code in CPROVER.
A decision procedure is an algorithm which can check if a set of logical

> statements is satisfiable, i.e. if there is an value for each variable which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statements is satisfiable, i.e. if there is a value for each variable which
```

class of problems.  CPROVER includes its own SMT solver, built on top
of a SAT solver but can also interface to external solvers.

CBMC and JBMC create formulae which describe some of the execution of parts of a
program (see \ref goto-symex for how this is done) and then use a solver to see
if there are any executions which break an assertion.  If the formula describing
the execution and the formula describing the assertion are satisfiable
then it is possible for the assertion to fail and the assignment of the
variables can be used to build an error trace (see \ref goto_tracet).  Thus
the performance and capability of the solver used is crucial to the utility of
CBMC and JBMC.  Other tools make use of solvers in other ways to handle other
problems.  It is important to distinguish between goto-models,
goto-programs, etc. which describe programs and have a semantics in
terms of execution and formula that have a semantics in terms of
logic.  Solvers work with formulae and so have no notion of execution
order, assignment, "before", branching, loops, exceptions,
side-effects, function calls, etc.  All of these have to be described

> in the formula that are input if you want to reason about them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the formula presented to the decision procedure if you want to reason about them.
```

Other tools use solvers in different ways but the basic interface and
ideas remain the same.

\section solvers-interfaces Key Interfaces

> The most basic interface is `decision_proceduret` .  It gives the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most basic interface is `decision_proceduret`.  It gives the
```

a solver, then this is the most basic interface you have to support,
if you are using the solver, this is the best interface to use as it
does not commit you to any particular kind of solver.  Looking at the
inheritance diagram from `decision_proceduret` is a good way of
getting an over-view of the solvers currently supported.

Many (but not all) decision procedures have a notion of logical
expression and can provide information about logical expressions
within the solver.  `prop_convt` expands on the interface of
`decision_proceduret` to add a data-type (`literalt`) and interfaces
for manipulating logical expressions within the solver.

Within decision procedures it is common to reduce the logical
expressions to equivalent expressions in a simpler language.  This is
similar to what a compiler will do in reducing higher-level language
constructs to simple, assembler like instructions.  This, of course,
relies on having a decision procedure for the simpler language, just
as a compiler relies on you having a processor that can handle the
assembler.  One of the popular choices of "processor" for decision
procedures are SAT solvers.  These handle a very restricted language

> in which all variables are simple Booleans and all formula are just

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in which all variables are simple Booleans and all formulae are just
```

made of logical gates.  By keeping their input simple, they can be
made very fast and efficient; kind of like RISC processors.  Like
processors, creating a good SAT solver is a very specialised skill, so
CPROVER uses third-party SAT solvers.  By default this is MiniSAT, but

> other are supported (see the `sat/` directory).  To do this it needs a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
others are supported (see the `sat/` directory).  To do this it needs a
```

adds bit-vector operations (plus, negate, multiply, shift, etc.) and
finally `bv_pointers` adds pointers.  This layering simplifies the
conversion to CNF and allows parts of it to be over-ridden and
modified (as `bv_refinementt` and `string_refinementt` do).

\section solvers-directories Directories

* `prop/`:   The interfaces above mostly live in `prop/`, which also
  contains a number of other supporting classes, like `literal.h`.

* `sat/`:   All of the code for interacting and interfacing with SAT
  solvers.  This is largely a 'leaf' directory and makes little use of
  external interfaces beyond things in `prop`.  `cnf.h` contains
  `cnft` and `cnf_solvert` which give default implements `propt`s gate
  functions (`land`, `lxor`, etc.) in terms of `lcnf` as most modern
  SAT solvers only have interfaces for handling CNF, not logical
  gates.  The various satcheck_* files implement the `propt`
  interfaces (generally with the `cnf_solvert` additions /
  simplifications) by connecting to various third-party SAT solvers.
  Finally `satcheck.h` use the build time flags to pick which SAT
  solvers are available and which should be used as default.

> * `qbf/`:   An equivalent of `sat/' for QBF solvers.  These extend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `qbf/`:   An equivalent of `sat/` for QBF solvers.  These extend
```

* `flattening/`:   A library that converts operations to bit-vectors,
  including calling the conversions in `floatbv` as necessary. Is
  implemented as a simple conversion (with caching) and then a
  post-processing function that adds extra constraints.  The `boolbvt`
  solver uses these to express bit-vector operations via the `propt`
  interfaces. This is not used by the SMT2 back-ends.

* smt2/:   Provides the `smt2_dect` type which converts the formulae to
  SMT-LIB 2 and then invokes one of Boolector, CVC3, CVC4, MathSAT, Yices or Z3.
  Note that the interaction with the solver is batched and uses
  temporary files rather than using the interactive command supported by
  SMT-LIB 2. With the `–fpa` option, this output mode will not flatten
  the floating point arithmetic and instead output SMT-LIB floating point standard.

* `floatbv/`:    This library contains the code that is used to
  convert floating point variables (`floatbv`) to bit vectors
  (`bv`). This is referred to as ‘bit-blasting’ and is called in the
  `solver` code during conversion to SAT or SMT. It also contains the
  abstraction code described in the FMCAD09 paper.

> *. `lowering/`:  These are `exprt` to `exprt` reductions of operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `lowering/`:  These are `exprt` to `exprt` reductions of operations
```

   rather than the `exprt` to `bvt` reductions in `flattening/`
   allowing them to be used in SMT solvers which do not inherit from
   `prop_conv_solvert`.

> *. `refinement/`: Solvers that build on the `bv_pointerst` solver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `refinement/`: Solvers that build on the `bv_pointerst` solver
```

   interface and specialise the handling of certain operations to
   improve performance.

> *. `miniBDD/`:  A canonical representation of Boolean formulae.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `miniBDD/`:  A canonical representation of Boolean formulae.
```

\section solvers-overview Overview

This directory contains most of the decision procedure related
functionality in CPROVER.  A decision procedure is an algorithm which can check
if a set of logical statements is satisfiable, i.e. if there is an
value for each variable which makes all of them true.  Formally all
that is needed is determining if they are satisfiable, in practice it
is often very valuable to know the assignments of the variables.
Tools (and components) that implement decision procedures are often
called solvers.  For example a SAT solver is a tool that implements a
decision procedure for checking the satisfiability of formulae (often
in CNF) over Boolean variables.  An SMT solver is a tool that
implements decision procedures for the Satisfiability Modulo Theories
class of problems.  CPROVER includes its own SMT solver, built on top
of a SAT solver but can also interface to external solvers.

CBMC and JBMC create formulae which describe some of the execution of parts of a

> program (see \ref goto-symex for how this is done) and then use a solver to see

Reviewer 2: Is this ref accurate?

Author: Yes in the general sense; it's in that area of the code.

if there are any executions which break an assertion.  If the formula describing
the execution and the formula describing the assertion are satisfiable then

> then it is possible for the assertion to fail and the assignment of the

Reviewer 2: then then

Author: Fixed.

> variables can be used to build an error trace (see \ref goto-trace).  Thus

Reviewer 2: I don't think this reference is accurate: \ref goto_tracet ?

Author: Fixed.

the performance and capability of the solver used is crucial to the utility of
CBMC and JBMC.  Other tools make use of solvers in other ways to handle other
problems.  It is important to distinguish between goto-models,
goto-programs, etc. which describe programs and have a semantics in
terms of execution and formula that have a semantics in terms of
logic.  Solvers work with formulae and so have no notion of execution
order, assignment, "before", branching, loops, exceptions,
side-effects, function calls, etc.  All of these have to be described
in the formula that are input if you want to reason about them.

> Other tools us solvers in different ways but the basic interface and

Reviewer 2: use

Author: Done.

as a compiler relies on you having a processor that can handle the
assembler.  One of the popular choices of "processor" for decision
procedures are SAT solvers.  These handle a very restricted language
in which all variables are simple Booleans and all formula are just
made of logical gates.  By keeping their input simple, they can be
made very fast and efficient; kind of like RISC processors.  Like
processors, creating a good SAT solver is a very specialised skill, so
CPROVER uses third-party SAT solvers.  By default this is MiniSAT, but
other are supported (see the `sat/` directory).  To do this it needs a
software interface to a SAT solver : this is `propt`.  It uses the
same `literalt` to refer to Boolean variables, just as `prop_convt`
uses them to refer to logical expressions.  `land`, `lor`, `lxor` and
so on allow gates to be constructed to express the formulae to be
solved.  If `cnf_handled_well` is true then you may also use `lcnf` to
build formulae.  Finally, `prop_solve` will run the decision procedure.

As previously mentioned, many decision procedures reduce formulae to
CNF and solve with a SAT solver.  `prop_conv_solvert` contains the

> foundations of this conversion.  It implements the `prop_conv` by

Reviewer 2: prop_convt

Author: Done.

having an instance of `propt` (a SAT solver) and reducing the
expressions that are input into CNF.  The key entry point to this

> procedure is `convert` which then splits into `convert_boolean` (which

Reviewer 2: prefix function names by the class name to make doxygen link it correctly

Author: Done; I think.
